my name is barb oakley and i'm so happy
to be able to give you some insight with
this video about the neuroscience of
learning
and especially how these insights can
inform educational policy
after all perhaps the best way to move
teaching and learning onto the 21st
century is by building on the great
insights that neuroscientists and
cognitive psychologists are providing
about the brain
we should begin by getting on the same
page about
reviewing what happens in the brain as
you're beginning to learn
if we focus on one of the brain's
fundamental building blocks
that is the neuron
we can understand some of the most
important aspects of how we learn
a neuron has these sort of legs
that
dangle off it they're called dendrites
i show three dendrites here but there
are actually there can be hundreds
and there are these little toes that
emerge off of the
dendrites these toes are called
dendritic spines
and then we have a sort of arm that
comes up above
that's called an axon
when you're learning
neurons are sending electrical signals
to each other making a little web of
connections in long-term memory in the
neocortex
a lot of times you'll hear that you
don't need to memorize anything because
you can always look it up
but could you speak french for example
if you were always looking it up on
google translate
could you take derivatives in math if
you always had to look up how to do it
no of course not
you need key aspects of whatever you're
learning in long-term memory for you to
be able to truly have learned anything
new
and for you to gain expertise in any
topic
now learning often involves practice
practice is what helps strengthen those
neural connections as you can see
metaphorically here
so ultimately
those sets of links become sort of like
this
big thick nice necklace that you can
easily pull into mind whenever you've
learned something
so this brings me to an important aspect
of learning that sometimes people aren't
aware of
and that is
what is the most important and powerful
technique that people can use to learn
most efficiently
i'm going to present four different
approaches here that are commonly used
for learning
what i'd like you to do is just think
which of these four approaches that i'm
going to present here is the approach
that you use most often for your
learning the first technique i'll
mention is that of rereading
rereading would make sense as a
potentially powerful technique for
learning because it involves repetition
then there's highlighting or underline
which involves motor neurons as you're
drawing and perhaps thus reinforcing
whatever is on the page
or it could be retrieval practice or
recall for example using a flashcard to
check and see whether you know the
information
or it could be creating what's called a
concept map such as the one i show here
where you write down key concepts of
what you're learning and then see how
they integrate together
hopefully of these techniques you see
here you have in mind which one you
think is best
which one is it
well as it turns out it's retrieval
practice
and indeed hundreds of studies have
shown that retrieval practice is the
most effective technique for helping
students learn
not only because it helps students
remember the material
but because it actually helps build a
better understanding of the material
why
well
when a student is first learning
something there are these weak links as
you see here being created in long-term
memory in the neocortex
but it is when you retrieve that memory
over and over over time
those sets of links
those are what help build the strong
links in the neocortex of memory
why does retrieval practice also help
with understanding
well in some sense it's because you're
not only learning what something is
you're also learning what it is not
now of course some students need more
retrieval practice with the material to
learn effectively it all depends on a
student's pre-existing knowledge base
their motivation
and their innate neural underpinnings
all of which can differ substantially
but even though it can take some
students longer to learn
those slower students like me
can learn the material just as well and
sometimes even better than faster
students
but what happens
if for example a student is very very
busy with all sorts of other activities
and they just don't get around to
retrieving and practicing with what
they've learned
well in that case they're not using
those particular dendritic spines that
they used for the learning and so
their little synaptic genit
sweep those connections away
we can actually see this process going
on in real life
you're all budding
neuroscientists now so you can recognize
this as
the leg
of a neuron the dendrite
it's a light microscopy image and this
image was taken before learning and
before sleep you see all these little
toes the dendritic spines that are
dangling off of it
now
can you imagine
what would this
particular living neuron or living
dendrite
look like
after learning and after sleep
we can actually see it
here's an image of the same living
neuron after learning and after sleep
look here
you can see
this is
the this lower image
has a new dendritic spine that's emerged
where there was none before
so it's actually during sleep that
neural connections are really formed and
strengthened
this is why it's a good idea for
students of course after they've learned
the material during the day
to set aside maybe two to five minutes
right before they go to sleep to remind
themselves of what they really want to
learn or remember
that will help their neurons to know in
some sense the ideas concepts or
techniques
that are important to be practicing
during sleep indeed during sleep
those connections are used hundreds of
times as the brain practices with those
thoughts and activities during the
sleeping process
so this can be why it's so important to
space out learning over a number of days
let's say a student has
say five hours for learning involving a
given topic
they may wish to break that up into one
hour
per day for five days
rather than
five hours all crammed in one day
this one day of cramming
means that the connections are actually
weaker and their little synaptic janitor
can more easily sweep them away
whereas for this spaced repetition in
learning one hour each day over these
five days
you not only learn
but you also practice during sleep
so in some sense you're getting twice
the bang for the buck for your effort
with spaced out learning as opposed to
cramming
metaphorically speaking since i
absolutely love metaphors
you can think of it as a little bit like
a brick wall
you lay a layer of bricks and then
mortar bricks and mortar but before you
go too high
you let that layer of bricks
dry the mortar to dry
and
if you take your time with learning like
this
it'll create a very good foundation
if you don't however you're going to get
a structure for learning that looks more
like this
very poor foundation for learning
this is also irreverently sometimes
referred to as the meathead theory of
learning
as it turns out both muscular tissue and
neural tissue are excitable tissues
so just as it takes time to build
muscular structure
it takes time to build
neural structure
of course however some students can
learn much more quickly while others
much more slowly
just as there are natural athletes
compared to
natural klutz's like me
now to another aspect of learning
this relates to what is called working
memory which involves the limited set of
ideas or thoughts that we can
temporarily hold in mind and work with
so for example if i gave you the numbers
seven four three and two for you to
remember you would hold them in working
memory by repeating them seven four
three two
but if you stopped repeating you'd
forget
long-term memory on the other hand can
hold information for a long time but it
can take much more effort to get
information out of working memory and
into
long-term memory as sets up links that
form those memories
i like to think of working memory as
kind of like an octopus sometimes i call
it the attentional octopus
well maybe you'd be better off calling
it a quadrupos because instead of having
eight arms to hold information
your working memory has on average only
about four arms
long-term memory on the other hand is
quite different
it's more like a locker
and within that locker
is stored all your sets of neural links
you can think of it like this
your working memory
works hard to create sets of links in
long-term memory about whatever you're
learning
once working memory has created those
sets of links and set them in long-term
memory
it can then be easy for your working
memory to reach out and grab those sets
of links
so
this brings me
to my younger daughter rachel
now not before this little video snippet
was filmed that you're going to see
rachel had learned how to back up a car
so i asked rachel if she might model for
us on video what it felt like when she
was first backing up a car
here she is
modeling what it felt like
watch her little face as she's trying to
back up the car
notice how she's looking to the side she
looks up front she looks at us she's
looking behind her her working memory is
overwhelmed she doesn't really know what
to do and then of course she ends up
heading off towards the ditch
this gives us a sense of the process
that occurs as people are first learning
something especially if that something
is rather complex
their working memory is trying to
integrate all this different information
so you can think of it as their working
memory has what's called a heavy
cognitive load and that means that the
arms of their attentional octopus
are already full
there's not room in their working memory
for any other information
so if i was sitting beside rachel i
would not be asking her as she's
learning how to back up the car hey by
the way what are you going to do today
if she also tried to put some
attentional octopus arms around what i
was saying
she could ultimately become completely
overwhelmed and maybe even hit another
car as she was trying to back up
but once rachel learned how to back up a
car
it became easy for her to do
all she had to do was think hey i want
to back up the car
she can then pull that memory those sets
of links of how to back up the car to
mind
she has a light cognitive load in other
words she's got attentional arms
available for other thoughts like is my
seatbelt fastened or what's the song on
the radio
so let's turn our attention now to a
student
let's say that our student is
sitting down to take an exam and they
practice well for the exam
so they sit down they take a look at the
first problem and they go hmm this is a
tough one
but since they practiced they can
quickly see that certain sets of links
that they've already learned can easily
connect with other links and still other
links and boom
suddenly they've solved the problem
but on the other hand
if students haven't studied using
retrieval practice
they can sit down to a test and what can
happen is surprise
they realize that where they may have
thought they knew the material
in reality they didn't
in fact when they start to work on the
problem they realize there are no sets
of links in long-term memory for them
what they thought was in long-term
memory was actually only in their
working memory
they didn't really know the material
what happens then is that these students
can come to us as teachers and say you
know
i suffer from test anxiety
but it often isn't test anxiety at all
it's the fact that they have not learned
the material well they haven't practiced
and place sets of links in long-term
memory
probably the biggest part of the
challenge for our students is that we've
never taught them how to study
effectively
they think their lack of ability is due
to their stress when it actually relates
to the fact that they haven't learned
the material properly
and we can make things worse for our
students when we send them off to
counseling
which also allows them to procrastinate
which is another frequent problem for
students
all this instead of teaching them how to
effectively learn the material
the reality is the common facet of
experts of all kinds
is that they have lots and lots of
well-practiced sets of links in
long-term memory
now an important idea for teachers is
that working memory capacities
can vary
so as i've mentioned a typical working
memory can hold about four pieces of
information or chunks of information
a chunk can vary in size and content
it's something you know so well you can
easily pull it to mind as a single unit
whether it's for example a section of a
song you can play well on the piano or
an equation you know how to work with or
a sentence in a foreign language
some people have a lesser capacity
working memory
for example i've got a lesser capacity
working memory i'm lucky to be able to
hold maybe three pieces of information
in mind at once but of course some
people have a greater capacity working
memory than just four pieces of
information
my colleague in teaching the popular
course we both teach on coursera
learning how to learn
is terry sinowski the francis crick
professor at the salk institute
terry is one of only 12 living human
beings who is simultaneously a member of
the national academy of sciences of
engineering and of medicine
terry has an enormously large working
memory capacity
the difference between us
is that although i can learn what terry
learns i am generally much slower than
he is
unless of course it's something i have a
lot of experience with by comparison to
terry
you might think well yes but what about
growth mindset
maybe we just haven't improved our
working memory capacity yet
of course having the right attitude
about what we're learning can make an
enormous difference it certainly did for
me what i decided to change my mind back
in my mid-20s about whether or not i
could learn in math and science
but we have to be realistic about what
growth mindset actually applies to
i mean if we have two kids with
different heights
growth mindset is not going to make a
big difference in whether or not one kid
can become taller
it's it's a physical characteristic
working memory capacity is also a
physical characteristic and it's one
that a student can't really change no
matter how hard they try
so let's look
at how
working memory capacity changes as
students mature when a child is very
young
it turns out their working memory
capacity no surprise
is very small
they can forget what you tell them is
pretty much as fast as you can tell them
but as children
mature
their working memory capacity gets
larger until by the time they're about
15 years old
they can hold on average well anywhere
between maybe three pieces
to five pieces of information in mind at
once
this means that a typical teacher is
going to have a wide range of working
memory capacities and learning speeds in
their classroom
this is handled today by a technique
known as differentiation
differentiation involves scaffolding
information
that is breaking information up into
smaller chunks
scaffolding allows students who grasp
the material more slowly to still learn
the material
slower learners also benefit very
greatly from more practice with the
material
of course this
step-by-step approach with much more
practice for those with lesser capacity
working memory can take much more time
but what do we do in the classroom when
we have someone
like for example this who has a
prodigiously large working memory
capacity
a student with such working memory
capacity can move out of the realm of
what a typical teacher can handle when
they're trying to differentiate and help
all the students in their classrooms
thus my colleague terry sinowski was
seen as a troublemaker in his high
school because he asked a myriad of
questions that his teachers were often
simply unable to answer
this brings me to an important topic
called the expertise reversal effect
it turns out that the more knowledgeable
a student is about a topic
the less guidance they can need too much
guidance in these situations actually
impedes their learning
think about how frustrated students can
get if they
knew as much or even far more than their
teacher on a topic and yet we held them
back
instead of recognizing and honoring
neurodiversity in other words we can
simply stick everyone in the same slot
and say they must learn identically
instead of allowing students like terry
to flourish we can frustrate these
gifted students to such an extent that
the allure of drugs or anything besides
school can become
overwhelming our school systems need to
accommodate our gifted students like
terry as well as those who benefit from
slower learning with far more practice
like me
that's an important part of the
educational process
not only to reach those within typical
standard deviations of how brains
function
but even those who fall far outside the
mean
incidentally if you're looking for the
research citations involved in this
topic
feel free to go to this url
so now we come to my favorite athlete of
all time
julius eagle
julius is from kenya and if you know
anything about kenya you know they're
famous for their long-distance runners
well if you look at julius's arms it's
pretty clear that he's not a
long-distance runner in fact julius
always wanted to learn to throw the
javelin
sadly he couldn't afford to go overseas
and study
at that time there weren't any great
javelin throwing coaches in all of kenya
so what did julius do
he began watching youtube videos
as it turns out by watching great
instructors on youtube and then going
out and practicing
98 of the time simply doing that
julius became the world champion in
throwing the javelin
this tells us a lot for one thing it
tells us that we can learn things we
never thought we could learn
simply by going online
julius also shows us some very
perceptive approaches to learning wealth
that we can apply in our own learning
and teaching
what do i mean by this
let's take a moment and look at the
history of education
for thousands of years a typical
approach to teaching in school was just
to stand up there and lecture for hours
and this made sense it makes sense even
right now you're watching a lecture here
as i speak
we can't sit around the table together
much as i would love to and converse in
person
but in general going on for many hours
at a time is perhaps not as effective an
approach as it could be in teaching
teachers begin to realize
starting maybe 30 to 40 years ago that
active learning can be very very
beneficial in learning
so it became a popular notion
very nearly a fad that students only
learn the material when they're actively
looking on it
so all of a sudden teaching became swept
up in this idea that active learning was
the only way that students learn
but what is active learning really
often it involves only a superficial
notion
of how student brains actually learn
i mean you've already seen here that
retrieval practice which is generally
and rightly considered a part of active
learning is very important
but a student has to get those sets of
neural links at least weekly in place
before they have anything to retrieve
in other words guidance from a teacher
from pages of a book or the pixels of a
video are still necessary to get
students started in their initial
placement of sets of links involving the
material into the brain
so at least some explicit explanation
from teachers along with active practice
by students
are necessary for learning
but what's the best mixture
i mean should it be a lot of explicit
instruction with a with a little
practice
or a little lecture with lots of active
learning practice
or perhaps we also might have
something that is a mixture of lecture
equally distributed lecture and active
learning frankly researchers really have
little idea of
what the appropriate mixture is of
active learning with lecture
it depends on what your students
backgrounds are their individual traits
and capacities but what we do know based
on plenty of research evidence is that a
mixture of explanation in active
practice is the best way to go
this explanation active practice mixture
is called
direct instruction
doesn't this make sense
isn't this what most teachers do mix up
an explanation with letting students
work actively on the material
and indeed this is exactly what julius
ego was doing when he was learning to
become a world champion and throwing the
javelin
he would pay attention to the video
and then he would go out
and practice
watch
watch and practice
it was explicit instruction
mixed with active practice and that's
how he became an expert in throwing the
javelin but what does this all mean from
a neuroscientific perspective
i've mentioned that we create sets of
links in long-term memory when we learn
anything
but what i didn't mention was that there
are two
different pathways that these sets of
links can be deposited into long-term
memory
the first pathway involves taking the
information we receive
from working memory
as it passes through the hippocampus
into
long-term memory
this is called the declarative pathway
it's called declarative because we can
declare it we're consciously aware of it
this passes through the hippocampus
there's a completely different pathway
though called the procedural pathway
and this
goes through the basal ganglia
we're often not conscious of things
we've learned procedurally for example
you may make use of
the patterns of your native language
without even being conscious of them
because you've learned them procedurally
as it turns out both declarative and
procedural sets of links are what allow
us to learn well and excel in what we're
learning what do i mean by that
i mean that the links deposited by each
system can have very very different
characteristics
and you need both types of links to be
able to be fast
intuitive and flexible in whatever you
or your students are learning
now declarative learning as it turns out
can develop through conscious
explanation so you're conscious for
example of what i'm explaining here
right now
procedural learning on the other hand
develops through
lots of practice
practice solving theorems practice tying
your shoelaces practice playing a song
on the piano skateboarding or speaking a
new language
procedurally learned information is
unusual in that you can't explain it
very easily
if you know how to solve a rubik's cube
for example you
may or may not be able to explain how
you can solve it
but you can still solve it
and indeed many children can learn
really well procedurally even though
they can't learn that well declaratively
so
for example
those on the autistic spectrum can
sometimes learn incredibly well and
swiftly by learning procedurally
but if you ask them to stop and explain
every step declaratively well that's not
the way they learned
you can actually kill these students
interest and desire in learning by
making them stop and use only the
declarative approach to explain whatever
they're learning
because that's not how they learned
again it's the expert reversal effect
where walking back through what you
already know well
can kill desire and motivation for
learning
the procedural system is often thought
of as only involving that awful
rote learning
but in reality it's at the heart of our
ability to understand and work with
incredibly complex patterns like that of
your native language which you learn
procedurally
the beauty of the procedural system is
that once you've learned something
through it no matter how complex it is
you don't need to worry about it anymore
because your procedural systems thinking
and problem solving is all done below
the level of conscious awareness
one can't help but wonder that when it
came to fairman's last theorem
a to the n plus b to the n is equal to c
to the n
fermat saw in a procedural system
intuitive glance the way to solve the
problem
but it took 250 years for the equation
to be proved declaratively
step by step
it's generally very slow to learn
proceed lately and it can take a lot of
practice
it takes a long time to learn to type
for example but it's very fast once
you've learned to type
but
procedural learning is also inflexible
so for example if my mischievous husband
went and rewired the different keys on
the keyboard it would take me a long
time to relearn how to type
each neural pathway declarative as well
as procedural has its advantages and
disadvantages in the types of links it
lays into place
but both types of links can underpin
good learning
keep in mind however that if we try to
fit every student into a box where they
must learn for example declaratively by
parroting back rote explanations we want
them to feed back to us
we can kill students interest and desire
in learning
in fact we can erroneously give a high
grade to a student who doesn't
understand how to do a problem at all
just because the student can parrot back
an explanation we want them to give
where on the other hand we may give low
marks to a student who knows how to
solve problems intuitively and correctly
but who can't parrot back the
declarative explanation a teacher might
demand
interestingly there's evidence that some
students can have an inclination
to learn more declaratively
while other students can have an
inclination to learn more procedurally
for example it seems that those with
dyslexia can have a strong tendency to
learn declaratively because there may be
challenge with some aspects
of their procedural learning system
on the other hand some students on the
autistic spectrum may have particularly
pronounced and talented procedural
systems in other words they learn best
procedurally
so
perhaps these sorts of differences are
what teachers are observing when they
feel that students have different styles
of learning
now
each system may provide
distinct gifts when it becomes
particularly strengthened as it is in
some students with seeming disorders
such as dyslexia and autistic spectrum
in fact this may be why some nobel prize
winners with dyslexia are able to
achieve their extraordinary
breakthroughs
likewise some on the autistic spectrum
have been able to achieve their nobel
prize winning breakthroughs because of
the strength of the procedural system
learning through one system as it turns
out can inhibit learning through the
other
so for example insisting that students
learn by being able to declaratively
step by step explain whatever they're
learning
may impede their ability to learn
procedurally
this means it can be difficult for them
to be fast and intuitive in their
handling of mathematical calculations
and procedures for example if they've
not practiced in ways that develop their
procedural sets of links
also especially for students with
dyslexia
it can be difficult for them to learn
math if they're presented with a lot of
verbiage and walls of text
that may seem like a blurred mess
dyslexia in fact has a 40 percent
overlap with
dyscalculia let's take a look at a few
extraordinary people
who can enhance our thinking about
neural differences
so here for example we have the
extraordinary marie curie was thought to
be on the autistic spectrum
and here is my favorite writer growing
up octavia butler who was bullied
because of her dyslexia
in fact director steven spielberg
attributes his movie-making prowess in
part to his dyslexia which slows his
reading considerably
and allows him to simultaneously
consider visuals in a way that the
neurotypical person cannot
then there's jack horner one of the
world's greatest paleontologists in the
basis for the main character in the
movie jurassic park
warner flunked out of the university
seven times
due to his dyslexia he never did finish
then there's albert einstein also
thought to be on the autistic spectrum
and muhammad ali dyslexia
scientist james lovelock creator of the
gaia hypothesis that living creatures
helped create the earth's atmosphere had
dyslexia
and elon musk
is on the autistic spectrum
can you imagine elon musk already
thinking at a graduate school level
while still in elementary school being
forced to think in lockstep with all the
other fifth grade children unable to
reach anything like his actual
capabilities because of high-bound
regulatory processes that insist despite
profound
neuroscientific evidence to the contrary
that students do not have natural gifts
and talents
but what do all these differences in
learning approaches and abilities mean
for teachers
it means it's not a good idea to put all
students in one teaching box and say
they must all learn the same way
they don't learn in the same way
it's incumbent on us as a society and
for us as teachers to make sure we're
reaching and teaching
neurally diverse students
and allowing them all to flourish
now how can we best teach students
well
retrieval practice is great for teaching
students to learn through both
declarative and procedural pathways
spaced repetition also helps students
learn through both pathways
straight explanation or lecture helps
with declarative learning
but on the other hand varied practice
and especially interleaving
help with procedural learning
what is interleaving
it means taking
and mixing closely related ideas
together
so that students can begin detecting the
differences which are sometimes subtle
as they're practicing
let's say for example that you have
problems that use
the geometric distribution
the binomial distribution and the
negative binomial distribution
typically students might do 10 of each
type of problem before moving on to
explore the next type of problem this is
called blocking
but if once students first get the hang
of how to solve a certain type of
problem they start mixing in problems of
a different type and then yet another
type
this helps them to start to understand
the differences between the different
types of problems and when to use the
different problem solving techniques
what good does it do a student after all
if they know how to do the geometric
distribution
and how to do the binomial distribution
but they don't know
when to use one approach versus the
other off they can go on a final
examination correctly using
the wrong technique unfortunately
textbooks often supply their problems
using a blocked approach
whereas students actually learn much
better using interleaving
so a good teaching approach is to try to
ensure
that despite the way that material is
presented in textbooks
that students are presented with
interleaved problem sets in whatever
they're learning
it's important to remember that when you
eliminate seeming
rote approaches to learning disparaging
these type of approaches by using
phrases such as drill and kill
you are actually eliminating the easiest
best way the brain has to handle routine
learning tasks
instead
it's best to think of procedural
learning as drill to skill i'd like to
turn now briefly to touch on a topic
that may seem to have little to do with
how the brain works and how it learns
but what i'm going to talk about
involves such a common and commonly
misapplied approach to teaching that i
think it's important to talk about it
and that relates to the problem of
collaborative and team learning
so
veronica mintz
is a high school student or was a high
school student who wrote an op-ed in the
new york times that describes the common
challenges
students incur in today's teaching
she estimates that
80 percent of her learning at school
took place in collaborative teams
the consequence was that she grew to
dread school because of her teacher's
inability to manage students
responsibility for controlling student
behavior was being foisted off on
students who had little ability or
training to deal with the complex issues
involved in motivating their peers who
often had no interest in learning
at the heart of the problem of group
learning in school in fact is the idea
that group learning is a panacea that
generally allows for excitement
engagement
and creativity
oh contraire
let me give you an example
when i was going through engineering
school i was on a team that was tasked
with designing a high efficiency heat
exchanger
the three guys on my team poo-pooed my
idea instead devising ideas that it
turned out were virtually identical to
the other ideas in the class
so when the professor happened to stop
by i mentioned my idea
he said
that's very interesting and hasn't been
done before you should try it
grudgingly my team tried the idea
our heat exchanger turned out to have
the highest efficiency
heat exchanger of any exchanger that had
been designed in the 20 years that the
professor had been teaching that class
i'm not saying this to blow my own horn
i'm saying this because in fact
research has shown
that it is individuals rather than
groups who are by far the most creative
when it comes to scientific or
technological breakthroughs
one massive review of tens of millions
of patents and papers found that it was
one person
perhaps two or
at most three individuals working
together who made truly creative
breakthroughs
larger groups could accomplish large
tasks
but not truly creative tasks
so if you're planning to have your
students work collaboratively
keep in mind that collaboration is not a
cure-all for creative work
in fact too much can diminish creativity
but there's more
there's the biggest challenge in all of
teamwork
and that is
that there will always be some team
members who do not pull their weight
to understand this we should step back
and look at an article in the chronicle
of higher education by harvard professor
robert coles
coles told the story of a young student
who was working her way through harvard
by cleaning dorm rooms
one student let's call him michael
was a pre-med student who was already a
successful journalist
michael would rudely and crudely
proposition this young woman whenever
she cleaned his room
what was worse was that both she
and this student had taken classes in
morality and ethics together and michael
apparently had excelled
so here was this star student a seeming
paragon of society at harvard
and the reality was that he learned
nothing in his ethics and morality
classes despite his top grades
in fact as this young woman pointed out
worldwide there are many philosophers
scientists poets and politicians who
have experienced plenty of morality
training through their early lives
and have gone on to support despicable
causes and regimes
in the end this woman resigned from what
she called fancy phony cambridge
with her departure harvard lost a
guiding light in morality while instead
with michael
graduating and ethically repulsive
character
it's important to remember
that there will always be a few students
like michael amongst us and amongst our
teams
such students will parry back the line
of morality even as they can take deep
advantage of those they're working with
to deal with these kinds of situations
and also with situations where students
may be overworked overwhelmed and still
willing to take advantage if necessary
you might give students the tools that
they need through life
through using a case study
here's a good example case study that
may be of help this is how to manage
yourself on a collaborative team
this brief essay describes a typical
student who takes advantage of others
and tell students what to do
if they find themselves in a team with
this kind of situation
this form as well as the others i'll be
mentioning
can be found with research citations
that i point out earlier
social emotional learning is
exceptionally important
talking through a case study like this
one allows students to understand one of
the most important aspects of social
emotional learning
one that is typically neglected and that
is the importance of saying no when
necessary
learning to put up boundaries is
exceptionally important especially for
young girls who are often socialized to
be empathetic and agreeable
think about it if you always teach that
empathy is extraordinarily important
who's going to listen to and heed this
message
well
it's those who are already empathetic in
fact by over emphasis on empathy without
committing training on how to say no and
set limits in the behavior that we
accept from others
we can set students
especially kind and empathetic students
up for codependency
that is the situation where a person can
put up with almost any kind of
mistreatment because they think they're
helping others
there are other ways beyond the case
study that teachers can use forms and
checklists to help them better manage
teams in their classroom
for example this form
provides policies for team assignments
so students know exactly what role to
play on their team whether it's
coordinator monitor or checker
this team expectations agreement can
help students to sign off on their
expectations
signing off together on expectations
prevents situations where a student can
claim to have not known what they were
supposed to be doing or how they can
contact other students on the team
this form evaluation of progress towards
effective team functioning
allows students to get a sense of how an
optimal team should be functioning
including checks to see if their team is
meeting on time whether they're quickly
getting on task
and whether they're listening to one
another
this peer reading of team members form
allows teams
to evaluate one another
of course this form once it's filled out
is for your eyes only
you might be surprised to learn that one
of the most useful aspects of this form
is that it allows you to see how some
students are exceptionally helpful
behind the scenes where you can't see
above all it's important to remember as
my own work on pathological altruism has
shown
that over emphasis on the value of
empathy
can end up reaching only the already
empathic
this can lead to these sensitive
individuals being taken advantage of and
bullied and also lead these already kind
students towards lives of codependency
let's turn now to an exceptionally
important idea which as cognitive
psychologist dan willingham notes with
his book by that name
when can you trust the experts
how can you tell good science from bad
in education
as willingham notes educators fall
primarily into two groups
those who understand the world through
reason and those who understand the
world through experience
if we look carefully these ideas seem to
relate to declarative learning as
opposed to experiential procedural kind
of learning
in fact if we look more closely
we could say that willingham's objective
reason
that is
declarative learning
is a little bit like this blue box here
it's going through the hippocampus
remember we're at least partly conscious
of what's going on in the working memory
and onward through the hippocampus as
declarative learning proceeds logically
step by step through the hippocampus
whereas experience that is procedural
learning is something like this this
gray box of the basal ganglia
procedural learning then is sort of a
misty fog or we're not conscious of its
influence no matter how profound that
influence might be
but there is a difference between these
two approaches which involves the
complex nature of the basal ganglia
now i shouldn't imply that the
hippocampus
this hippocampus here is simple
but we're conscious of our thinking when
we're using declarative
hippocampal thinking
and in this sense it's simpler so if
we're thinking along here we can think
logically step by step and we're
conscious of what we're thinking
but with this basal ganglia procedural
learning on the other hand
we're not conscious
of this extremely complex system
this type of learning through the basal
ganglia develops through plenty of
practice over and over again so that's
how you learn to hit a ball or how to
solve a rubik's cube how you speak your
native language
whatever you're learning that is
processed through the basal ganglia
generally involves non-conscious
procedural learning
now also this procedural system develops
what's called a
value function
this value function develops around what
is ultimately found to be most rewarding
in other words the value function of the
procedural system is like a nest
of hidden thinking about what is deemed
optimal for you in the long run
based on thousands and thousands of
previous experiences
inputs what you've seen what you've done
what you've heard everything
all of this is wrapped up inside that
procedural value function
and this procedural value function
subconsciously biases your conscious
thinking
you may think you are thinking
completely logically but you're not your
conscious declarative thinking emerging
from your working memory and hippocampus
is biased by your procedural system's
value function
let's say that you give a logical
step-by-step argument to someone you
think conclusively proves your case
you think
that that person is following your
argument with their conscious
declarative system and they may be
but their procedural system is also
influencing what they're thinking
and the person is completely unconscious
of this bias
in fact this is the source
of a very common bias which is the
i'm not biased bias
let's say for example you have two
equally trained statisticians and you
give them a paper on a controversial
topic of your choice
one is pro this controversial topic
and the other is against it
as you might guess
when the statisticians read the paper
they will almost always come up with
quite different
conclusions
if the paper supports their bias they
will be like oh obviously it's a very
objective well-designed study
but if the paper goes against their
pre-existing bias
they will find ways to
poke holes in it and undermine instead
of accepting its credibility
these different views on the same exact
paper are due to the influence of each
statistician's value function
which the statisticians themselves are
oblivious of
or if they're aware of their bias
they're so completely
convinced oftentimes that their bias is
right that they think it's objective
thinking
our procedural systems can be shaped not
only by our experiences but also by the
training we might receive from our
education
the type of media we read or people that
we're surrounded by
for example if we learn to associate
certain seemingly benign ideas with
evil or somehow sinful behavior
that is our thoughts on this topic have
been associated with negativity via the
amygdala
well that's going to bias our procedural
thinking
as a consequence when we encounter that
topic we can't think objectively and
logically about it
because of our pre-existing bias
and because of how our dopamine system
is set up we can even experience
pleasure and joy every time we might
sort of hate on
the ideas or people we've learned to
associate with negativity
it can become natural for some less
flexible and more dogmatic individuals
to block out ideas that are
contradictory because it can be
reinforcing and pleasurable as they
reaffirm
how correct they are in their thinking
even as they denigrate any conflicting
ideas
in this way individuals can find
themselves no longer being informed by a
broad spectrum of insights
instead they can become more and more
deeply convinced that only their own
approach is correct
this phenomenon as it turns out is
surprisingly common in very intelligent
people
in fact as tolstoy once said
the simplest thing cannot be made clear
to the most intelligent man if he is
firmly persuaded that he knows already
without a shadow of a doubt
what is laid before him
this
inflexibility of intelligent people is
part of why research itself
has shown that science does indeed seem
to advance funeral
by funeral
in fact
it may surprise you to learn that key
researchers in fact entire groups of
prominent researchers can become
inflexibly fixed
and block progress in an area
for example alzheimer's research has
been blocked for years because there was
a monolithic feeling that one approach
involving the elimination of amyloid
plaques was correct
journal editors major researchers grant
providers and other leading figures were
all convinced that they knew the right
approach
but their approach was wrong
amyloid plaques were a symptom not a
cause of alzheimer's
it was like researchers combining forces
to learn how to reduce a person's high
temperature when they have pneumonia
instead of actually tackling the
pneumonia itself
this scientific group think
ended up holding back researchers in
alzheimer's for years
let's take a tiny mental break here
and go someplace together that can
inform us about what's going on in
education
where is that somewhere
the south pole station in antarctica
it's a bit chilly there i know because
that's me i used to work there
actually that's why i met my husband
so i always like to say i had to go to
the end of the earth to meet that man
in fact there's some interesting and
relevant ideas for education that we can
gain from polar research
to frame this i'd like to ask you
which of the three things that i'm going
to show you is not like the other
is it
lemons
limes
or polar bears
well it's actually the limes
why is that
to understand the answer to that
question we need to look back at the
history of scurvy
in the mid 1700s
james lund came up with a cure for
scurvy he found that lemons seemed to do
the trick as you can see from this
rather overly prettified painting of
people with scurvy
it took about 50 years for james lone's
findings to make their way
through common policy into the royal
navy
they administered lemon juice to all
sailors and it cured scurvy
easy peasy
but there was a problem
in the early 1900s polar explorers
started experiencing scurvy
it turned out that researchers had
thought they understood how to cure
scurvy but the reality was they didn't
really understand the underlying cause
of scurvy
that it involved a deficiency in vitamin
c
here's robert falcon scott who led the
first team to the south pole in 1912.
scott died not long after this picture
was taken while he was trying to get
back to the edge of antarctica
scott did a lot of things wrong on his
expedition but one of his biggest
challenges may have been that he and his
team came down with scurvy
but it's so easy to cure scurvy
how on earth 150 years after the cure
for scurvy was found
could people forget how to cure scurvy
simple the cure for scurvy was forgotten
due to
technological advances
ships started to go much faster so
sailors weren't stuck out at sea for
many months at a time
this meant that through the 1800s
as the source of citrus was changed from
high vitamin c lemons from the
mediterranean
to low vitamin c limes from the
caribbean and copper pipes began to be
used that destroyed what remaining
vitamin c there was
well
no one noticed
sailors just weren't out at sea long
enough to get scurvy
due to the much faster ships
in fact pretty much only polar explorers
who were away from the fresh fruits for
long periods of time began to get scurvy
especially antarctic explorers because
polar bears in the arctic
like lemons but unlike limes are potent
sources of vitamin c
the real problem was that technological
advances in the form of faster ships
caused problems with the reappearance of
scurvy
this was because researchers hadn't
truly understood the cause of scurvy
lund's previous superficial
understanding of scurby's cure helped
provide a remedy in the form of
mediterranean lemons
but the real cause of scurvy wasn't
understood
and technological advances masked
understanding
when scurvy was incipient
wrong-headed practices to cure the
disease
consequently begin to be increasingly
used
so how is the problem of technological
advances in some areas that set us back
in other areas
relevant for us today
let's take a look here at calculators
wow
we've got a calculator here isn't this
cool
you don't have to learn your
multiplication tables anymore because
calculators will do it all for you
in fact it can seem intuitively obvious
that students should just use
calculators save them the time and
struggle of learning multiplication
tables
this can sound great to those who don't
really understand how the brain learns
and the procedural system develops an
intuition about patterns like those of
mathematics and language
more than that let's just use search
engines because you know we can always
just look it up well
the reality is that you can't always
just look it up
in fact as we mentioned the common
factor of experts of all kinds is that
they have lots and lots of links in
their long-term memory
about the area of their expertise
whether it's chess math language music
art or what have you
but the real challenge is that adults
for example
really don't remember what it was like
for them as a child to learn math
to them
just using a calculator seems to make
sense because they often don't
understand how the brain acquires the
patterns of math
the the acquisition of expertise can
involve practice especially retrieval
practice along with spaced repetition
likewise as an adult your experience as
a reader is very different than it was
when you were a child when you were
first learning how to read
if you don't understand how students
brains actually learn to read
you can think that
joyous whole language approaches where
kids avoid the repetition of phonics is
the way to go
you can believe that no matter what
research says because it's your lived
experience as an adult
the value function of your procedural
system can bias you to close your mind
so it doesn't really matter what kind of
objective reason might be put to you
in fact the technological breakthroughs
of search engines and calculators which
are fantastic
have also misled us because we have not
previously understood at a deep level
what's going on in the brain when we're
actually learning things
it turns out that not
acquiring the neural patterns needed for
mastery
patterns which can involve plenty of
practice and yes some road learning
can students abilities to be
successful long-term in learning a
subject
i must close by referring to my favorite
scientist santiago ramone cahall
growing up kahal was basically a
terrible student
but this former loser of a student made
such
extraordinary scientific breakthroughs
that he was awarded the nobel prize
but even more impressive
kahal is now known as the father of
modern neuroscience
he was asked
how did you succeed
and he said well i was persistent
in other words he practiced a lot
but the second thing he said was that he
was flexible
as he said i have worked with many
geniuses
and i was no genius and he was not
but he said the problem with geniuses is
that they can jump to conclusions and
then when they're wrong
they can't change their minds
they simply use their intellects to find
a way to justify why they must have been
right after all
over and over again we are seeing that
technological advances in some areas
such as calculators and search engines
are actually hindering progress in
education
educators without a solid understanding
of how the brain actually learns can
inadvertently and sometimes inflexibly
promote approaches that can hinder
rather than help
students abilities to learn
but you on the other hand
have watched this talk all the way
through
i hope with an open mind and a
willingness to bring solid recent
insights from neuroscience and cognitive
psychology into education
it is you who will help bring our
students to the future
you have my deepest thanks and the
thanks of like-minded educators
and the thanks of the many students you
will impact in the years to come
you